
Create Accounts
For Jira Cloud in:
https://www.atlassian.com/software/jira
Once created, log in to the account.
Then go to Settings
Go to Apps
Scroll down and click on More Apps.. Till we reach:
Github for Jira
Install it.


Install github for Jira



Authorize Jira to get connected with Github




Confirm Integration : 
Go to: Jira → Apps → Manage apps → GitHub for Jira
You’ll see your connected repositories
Use Smart Commits to Link Git to Jira:
Create a New Branch for a Jira Issue
Let's say your Jira issue key is PROJ-101
git checkout -b feature/PROJ-101-login
Commit with Smart Commit Message
P1-2
git commit -m "PROJ-101: Added login feature #comment login module done #time 2h #transition In Progress"
This commit will:
Link the commit to the Jira issue
Add a comment to the issue
Log 2 hours work
Move the issue to "In Progress"
Jira will automatically detect this if GitHub is integrated and Smart Commits are enabled.





STEP 1: Sign up & Set up Jira (Cloud)
Go to: https://www.atlassian.com/software/jira
Click “Get it free” → Choose Jira Software (Cloud).
Sign in with your email or Google account.
Choose a project name and project type (Scrum/Kanban/Team-managed).
Note your Jira URL:
Example: https://your-company.atlassian.net
STEP 2: Connect GitHub to Jira
In Jira, go to:
Settings → Apps → Explore More Apps
Search for “GitHub for Jira”, click Install.
Authorize with GitHub.
Select the organization and repositories to connect.
Now Jira is connected with GitHub
Verify Smart Commits Are Active Automatically
Once GitHub for Jira is connected:
Smart Commits are enabled by default for those linked repositories.

STEP 3: Create an Issue in Jira
Click the “Create” button (top navbar)
Fill details:
Project: Your Jira project
Issue type: Task/Bug/Story
Summary: "Create login form"
Click Create
Note the issue key, e.g., PROJ-123
STEP 4: Make a Code Change & Smart Commit in VS Code
Create a file:
echo "console.log('Hello Jira');" > index.js
Add & commit with Smart Commit message:
git add .
git commit -m "PROJ-123: Added hello message #comment Initial commit #time 1h #transition In Progress"
git push origin main
Jira will:
Show the commit in the issue under Development
Log 1 hour in Time tracking
Add your comment
Change issue status to In Progress



STEP 5: Verify in Jira
Open the issue PROJ-123
Scroll to Development panel:
Commit should appear
Your comment and time tracking should be visible
Status should update to "In Progress" if #transition used

Done! You now have:
A Jira Cloud project
GitHub repo linked
Issues created
Git working in VS Code
Smart Commit working with Jira
